whatever you can remember of your childhood,
including the names of your parents, places and
dates of birth and death if you know them, things of
that nature, the schools you attended before
going to college and something of that nature. I
was born in Nashville, Tennessee on July 16th,
1904.
My father was William Abbott, and my mother was
Eleanor Ryan Abbott. My father died when I was very
young. As I
recall, it was 1910. But my mother lived to be about
93 and retained her health, I'm happy to say, all of
that time. And she stayed on in Nashville,
although I came to Texas and never left Texas after
I did come here. I came in 1926. Now, before that, I
attended the public schools in Nashville. The
grade school I attended from the first grade up to
the eighth was called Howard School in South
Nashville. I think it may still be in existence,
although I'm not sure whether it's an active
school or not. The high school I attended was
Hume-Fogg, which at that time was the only high
school in Nashville, although I think there was a
county high school called Central. Of course, now
there are any number of high schools there, and I
think it has become a special high school I'm not
sure what it does specialize in, but I think it is a
special purpose high school now. I went to, from
there, I went to Vanderbilt and went five years
there, the four undergraduate years and one
graduate year. Although I did not take my
master's, I did have the graduate year in
philosophy, but I was already pretty sure that
what I wanted to do was English language and
literature, and I suspect that's why I did not
finish the master's in philosophy. Your
undergraduate degree? My undergraduate work was
psychology and philosophy. Was psychology and
philosophy? Yes. Well, the department was a
combined department of psychology and
philosophy. I suppose, technically, I was a
philosophy major. although I had as many
psychology courses as were offered in the
combined department. Where does the English come
in? Was that a minor? It was a minor and a very full
minor, as a matter of fact. I had about as many
English courses as I had philosophy and
psychology courses. And, well, this may be of
interest to some people. I was in Vanderbilt. At
the time, the very famous fugitive group of poets
was there, and while I was only on the fringe and
attended only a few of their meetings, many of them
were personal friends of mine. Robert Penn
Warren, and will I'm sure be known to most people,
John Crowe Ransom, who was a teacher of mine, and
Walter Clyde Curry, a teacher of mine. You notice
they both are teachers in the Department of
English, rather than in the Department of
Philosophy. The Department of Philosophy, as a
matter of fact, was a one-man department. It was
Dr. Sanborn, who had been German trained,
and was really a very fine person. and an excellent
teacher.
You mentioned this fugitive group of poets. In
what way were they a fugitive group?
I'm not sure what they were fleeing from.
Some of them called themselves unreconstructed
southerners and a number of them were of what they
called themselves agrarians.
I'm not too sure of what they were, but also
Jeffersonian in the agrarian sense. But it was a
happenstance that they all were either on the
faculty at Vanderbilt or were students at
Vanderbilt or were very closely associated with
faculty and students. at Vanderbilt. Of course, a
number of them went on to make
international reputations for themselves, even
when the fugitive group itself broke up. I suspect
our library has a full file of the fugitive, the
actual fugitive poems.
Oh well, some others in the group were Alan Tate and
Oh, Wills, Ridley Wills, I remember, was in the
group. And Donald Davidson, I mentioned, I
believe, Walter Clyde Curry was a member of the
group. Well, of course, that was very stimulating
to students, and I'm not at all sure that it didn't
influence me also to shift over into language and
literature. I was fortunate enough to... and be
elected to Fabio DiCaprio at Vanderbilt.
And at that time I was, and had been for several
years, a counselor at a YMCA boys camp. And it was at
the camp that I received an offer to come to Texas
A&M in the Department of English.
I went back to Vanderbilt and talked to my dean and
asked him what I should do. Texas seemed a long way
off. And he advised me to go and try, see whether I
liked it or not. So I accepted. Had you applied for a
position here? No, no. I suspect that my name, all
from the dean's office, was probably made
available to a number of places, but I had not
applied anywhere. I was at the camp that summer
when the offer came. The amusing thing is that the
offer was for $1,800 for nine months a year. Three
days later, I got an offer from the Citadel over in
Carolina for $1,900. And although $100 doesn't
seem like very much, it did then. But I had
committed myself, and so I had to turn down the
citadel offer. And by way of coincidence, the man
whose place I took at A&M, and this is, I'm sure, how
Dr. Summey, Dr. George Summey, who was head of the
department, I'm sure that's how he found out about
me. was Professor Bryce Harris, and when I got
here, I discovered that he had taken the job at the
Citadel that I had been offered, so our paths
crossed. He had been a graduate student at
Vanderbilt a year ahead of me. So you think it
perhaps was on his recommendation? I suspect so,
yes, because Dr. Samuel would have had no way of
knowing anything about it, and I had been in a a
couple of classes with Bryce Harris. I was curious
as to how a native Tennessean had arrived at
College Station, Texas in 1925. In 26. 26. And
you've answered that. You mentioned that Texas
was a long way from Tennessee and you had some
perhaps misgivings about going so far away from
home. What were your first reactions when you
arrived in town? Let me be sure that now I am being
straightforward. Actually, I think I started
enjoying myself from the moment I landed,
although it was on a very hot September day, and I
had to walk from the railroad station to the old
bachelor club where I had a room. And I... Met Bryce
Harris there. He had not left yet for the Citadel. I
met several of the people who were staying in the
old bachelor club. And I think I really started
liking it almost immediately. And while I
originally had thought I might stay here for a year
or so to get a little experience in seasoning, I
never looked back.
For how long did you stay in the bachelor club? I
think about three years and then five of us who had
been in the bachelor club rented an apartment at
the north gate the apartments are still there at
stucco building we rented an apartment and hired a
cook to take care of us for two years let me see now if
I can count up 26 I married in 31 So that would be the
last two years before I married were with the five
in the apartment. And one of them is still here in
retirement, Alvin Zeller. Alvin Zeller, I think,
was in our sanitary engineering department. Now,
he was in the apartment in the bachelor club with
you? Yes. life like in a bachelor club, and what
sorts of things could you do for... Very, it was
very pleasant. It
was also a boarding house, and while it was on
college property, the dining room was run by a
private person. It was not a college, at that time
it was a college, not a college facility, but Mrs.
Boyd ran the dining room. It was an excellent
dining room. We all enjoyed it. In fact, for a
while, after we took the apartment, before we
found our own cook, we still boarded with her. And
was this the Boyd family that had the store? Yes,
yes. There's still some of the Boyds, a number of
the Boyds still here.
They lived just across... from the campus at that
time. I believe they had a store that was right
across from about where the post office is, across
the university's drive.
And so did the people who lived in the bachelor club
then own the building? No. Or you rented it from the
college? No. We rented a room. Each individual
rented a room. I'm not sure how many rooms. I'm
guessing there must have been around 30 rooms in
it. It had been a wartime building, that is, World
War I, but nothing, of course, is more permanent
than a temporary building, and it was still there,
still a sound building. So the building was owned
by the college? It was owned by the college, yes.
And faculty members, I presume all faculty, they
were all faculty members living there? Yes, all of
them were faculty members.
You mentioned about eating. In the Bachelor Club,
what types of things could you do for
entertainment and recreation? Oh, there was an
almost perpetual bridge game going on every
night. And I remember that we had three or four
dedicated
domino players and a couple of dedicated chess
players and uh let's see what oh and a good many
played golf
where did you play golf at that point it was called
the country club then it is the present brown
municipal course
any any other kind of physical activities other
than golf that uh yes i uh My sport, if I can be said to
have had a sport, was tennis. And I played a great
deal of tennis. I was fortunate enough to have as a
friend the then coach of tennis, who was a member of
the Department of English,
Mr. William Thomas. And so he would let me play with
team members. And, of course, I thoroughly
enjoyed that. And as a matter of fact, when Mr.
Thomas died in 1935, very suddenly, I took over as
coach, and I coached the tennis team then until I
went off to Iowa to do complete work on my
doctorate. That was about three years. At that
time, did you have any, say, when you went to coach
tennis, Did you have any reduction in your
teaching load, or did you get additional pay for
coaching? Never dreamed of asking. It was just
fun. It was fun. You got to play tennis along with
the team members then when you coached. Okay. You
mentioned that in 31 you married. Did you then move
on to the campus in a faculty home, or where did you
live?
For the first... couple of months or so we lived in
that same apartment house an apartment became
vacant and we lived in it but but we had been
building our own home a little home out in college
park it's the home we have now it was not ready when
we married because they'd been very bad weather
that fall it was supposed to have been ready when we
married on the 23rd of december but it was not ready
for several weeks after that. We lived in an
apartment. We were lucky enough to get this
apartment for that time. But at that point a goodly
number of the faculty were living in houses on the
campus, were they not? A good many were living,
particularly senior members of the faculty, were
living on campus. So then you've lived in the same
residence from Early 32, I take it, until today.
Until today, yeah.
You came here as an instructor from Vanderbilt in
26. And
you taught English. Do you remember what courses
you taught at that point? Almost exclusively
freshman courses because for many, many years, as
I'm sure you know, the department of english like
history and economics and modern languages was a
service department that is it we didn't even have
majors for a long time much less candidates for the
doctorate he existed to provide electives for the
other departments so mostly freshmen but uh or
maybe one or two sections of a sophomore course.
And at that time, the loads were regularly 15
hours. So you might have five sections. I would
have five sections. And the chances are there
would be three or four sections of freshman and one
or two sections of sophomore. And freshman
English then was somewhat like today, grammar,
primarily? Primarily. And sophomores would be
what, American literature? No. what I guess they
would call today types, like the essay, poems,
novel, and a play or two. I think it would be
probably called a types course. So kind of an
introduction to the various types of literature.
And then there was another sophomore course
called argumentation, which was the first course
was the literature of types course. And the second
semester in the sophomore year, was
argumentation.
And almost all students took the four semesters,
plus a one-hour course in the senior year in public
speaking. And that was changed, of course, later.
But at that time, that was almost universal, that
you could count on every Aggie having freshman
English, two semesters of sophomore English, and
one speech course. One speech course. In the
senior year. Well, perhaps that was when he needed
it the most.
I believe you rose to the rank of assistant
professor in something like three years. Was that
a normal
period at that point? Honestly, I don't know. Then
you notice there was a long gap. A long gap before
you made associate professor, but then only one
year an associate professor up to full. Yes, but I
had nothing but a bachelor's degree at that time.
You mean? See, I had had a graduate year, but I did
not take my master's degree. You came here with a
bachelor's. Yeah. You mentioned leaving here to
go to Iowa for a graduate to work on your doctorate.
What year was that? 37. 37. So that was shortly
before you rose to the associate professor. Yeah,
and I got my degree in 39. Uh-huh. And had you been
taking summer courses? I had taken summer courses
one summer at... The University of Wisconsin at
Madison and another at Tulane in New Orleans. And
then you had one full year at... And one full year at
Vanderbilt before I came. Oh, you mean at Iowa.
Well, I took leave for the academic year 1937-38. I
came back for the year 38-39 but went up there in the
summer and finished up in the summer of 39. So in a
sense you went uh you never did receive a master's
degree then. Never did. Just went from the
bachelor's and one year of graduate school then on
into a doctorate program. Not not very many places
would allow you to do that today I would think. Uh
not many people do it. I don't know how many places
would uh Say you can't do it. I think most people
like to have a crack at you at a master's term. Well,
now... And if you can make it, then they let you go on
for a doctorate. Well, I had to take the qualifying
examination, which would have been the same thing
as you would have done if you had the master's. I
didn't just say start out and go on to the
doctorate. You had a qualifying examination.
This was at Iowa. Yes. And you took that, what,
after you'd already had two summers elsewhere, I
take it?
Yes. Now, the graduate college at Iowa was very,
very considerate, and the graduate college did
let me take my final examinations much earlier
than would be normal. And I'm sure that very few
universities would do it. But the then dean of the
graduate college who was started later became, I
think, president of the Consolidated University
of New York and then Illinois. And it was his theory
that if I wanted to take the chance, Well, he would
let me take the chance, so I wanted to take the
chance, and did, after only, I
think I took it, I did take it, the summer of 38. So I
was in there barely a year when I took my final
examination. I believe today, I can remember when
I had mine, I had to have taken a specified number of
hours beforehand. And there was really no way you
could do that in one year.
I believe you mentioned that Dr. Sumi was head of
the English department when you came. Was he a
pretty good man to work under? One of the finest men
I ever knew in my life. For how long then did he stay
on as head of our chairman of the English
department?
You probably have more accurate dates than this.
It was a number of years until I think he just plain
got tired of administration and asked to be
relieved. He did want to stay on with his teaching
and did stay on and then The one who followed him was
also our head librarian at the time, Thomas R.
Mayo. Well, I've heard lots of people say lots of
good things about Dr. Mayo. They were both very
fine people.
I think Dr. Summey inspired the kind of loyalty
that you rarely find in an individual. I know of no
one who served under him who would not say the same
thing.
I think it was his marvelous character that,
although he was himself an excellent student of
language, and his book on punctuation is, I
suspect, still the standard book, although Dr.
Summey has been dead several years now, and his
revised version of that book or must be 15 years
old. But it is still, I think, the standard work on
punctuation.
Over the years that you were in the English
department and in various other positions, was
there a discernible difference in relationship
between, say, incoming faculty members and the
department head, or did that...
Were the department heads continuing to stay
close to all of their faculty members as the size of
the faculty increased, do you think? Or was there
almost necessary, in a sense, separation because
the departments became fairly sizable? Well,
they didn't become fairly sizable for a number of
years. In fact, the department was fairly stable.
I would say remarkably stable. until
the war years. And that was when the growth began,
tremendous growth, of course. I remember that Dr.
Mayo, I think, had to fill, I
hope I'm not exaggerating, 12 or 15 positions for
one fall. And we had a little indigestion at that
time because we greatly increased the size of the
department. Of course, that bulge
was short-lived because we didn't start our real
growth for a number of years after that. We went up
to about 9,000, I think, immediately after the
war. Then we fell back down to, what, around six?
Something like that. Something like that. My
memory is not that accurate. And then we just
slowly grew. It's only within the last three or
four years, of course, that we've had this...
Really ballooned. Almost an explosion.
I believe I had this right in 47, you were moved up to
an assistant to the dean and head of the basic
division.
What was the goal of the basic division? Well, it
was... It was a necessity, as a matter of fact. We
simply did not have room on campus for all the
freshmen. I mean, for all students. And so the
decision was made in 47. I did not go in 47. But Dr.
Harrington, M.T. Harrington, who later became
president and chancellor, He was asked to go out
and establish an annex in what had been the Air
Force Base, around the Air Force Base, which is
presently our research center, as you know. And he
did start it. And it was the next year that I went,
when he was asked to become Dean of Arts and
Sciences,
Dean Bolton, who was the executive dean. The title
was dean of the college, but it meant executive
dean, equivalent today, I think, of executive
vice president, or academic vice president,
probably.
Asked me if I would go out and take charge of the
annex, and I did, and had a marvelous time. And I was
there myself only from 48 until December of 1949,
when I followed Dr. Harrington as Dean of Arts and
Sciences. When he became Dean of the College, or
the Executive Dean. But for those nearly two
years, I had a very fine time. So, it was a out of
necessity for space. Oh, yes. At least a portion of
the student body. You were asking about the basic
division. It was not at first thought of really as
the basic division. It was just a way of taking care
of students. But the students did so well out
there, the freshmen who were out there, did so well
that it seemed a good idea to preserve the freshmen
as a separate unit. And
this was done even when room became available on
the campus again, and they were, the freshmen were
moved. You have a record of this. I don't remember,
was it 50? When they came back to the campus, when
the freshmen were moved back to the campus. I don't
remember right offhand what it was. But then it
became an administrative unit on campus, and...
at its director on campus, who was John Bertrand,
who had succeeded me.
And the basic division then remained a working
division for a good many years after that. So it was
a, it was kind of a special help For freshmen? Yes.
Even after it was not a physical necessity? Yeah.
The freshmen were all administered in this. That
is, the grades were kept there, the counseling was
done there. Were they registered separately?
Yeah,
well,
actually they were, of course, after that first
year. They went with their major department, as
they do now.